JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary of
State: The
current state of U.S.-Russia
relations is
at a low point.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary of
State Rex Tillerson
and his Russian counterpart meet
to discuss
the future of the two countries'
relationship,
amid disagreements over Syria's
use of chemical
weapons.
Then, we sit down with NATO's
secretary-general
after his meeting at the White
House with
President Trump, who has
strongly criticized
the NATO alliance.
And the Trump administration
sets its sights
on space -- how one congressman
who controls
NASA's purse strings is pushing
to go to the
moon, Mars and beyond.
REP.
JOHN CULBERSON (R), Texas: I
have always wanted
to restore NASA to the glory
days of Apollo,
as you and I remember as kids.
I want to see NASA go above and
beyond the
glory days of Apollo.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: New tensions
between the United
States and Russia dominated this
day.
America's top diplomat carried
U.S. grievances
over Syria and other issues to
Moscow, while
President Trump spoke out in
Washington.
Our chief foreign affairs
correspondent, Margaret
Warner, has our report.
MARGARET WARNER: The discord was
on display
at the very outset of Secretary
of State Rex
Tillerson's meetings with
Russian Foreign
Minister Sergei Lavrov.
SERGEI LAVROV, Russian Foreign
Minister (through
translator): We have a lot of
questions regarding
very ambiguous and as well as
sometimes contradictory
ideas on coming from Washington.
MARGARET WARNER: Tillerson
acknowledged sharp
differences, and after meeting
privately with
Russian President Vladimir
Putin, he emerged
with an even grimmer appraisal.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary of
State: The
current state of U.S.-Russia
relations is
at a low point.
There is a low level of trust
between our
two countries.
The world's two foremost nuclear
powers cannot
have this kind of relationship.
MARGARET WARNER: The most
immediate trigger
for tensions, a deadly sarin gas
attack in
Syria last week, and the U.S.
response, a
cruise missile strike on a
Syrian air base.
Lavrov again denied Russia's
ally the Syrian
government was responsible.
SERGEI LAVROV (through
translator): We believe
it's necessary to have an
international, unbiased,
frank investigation into this
incident.
There were no signs that would
support the
statement, the allegation that
chemical agents
were used there at all.
MARGARET WARNER: Tillerson
insisted again
that Syria's government did
carry out the
attack, and he called again for
Russia to
abandon President Bashar
al-Assad.
REX TILLERSON: We do think it's
important
that Assad's departure is done
in an orderly
way, an orderly way, so that
certain interests
and constituencies that he
represents feel
that they have been represented
at the negotiating
table for a political solution.
How that occurs, we leave that
to the process
going forward.
MARGARET WARNER: But in New York
this afternoon:
NIKKI HALEY, U.S. Ambassador to
the United
Nations: It is long past time
for Russia to
stop covering for Assad.
MARGARET WARNER: Russia vetoed a
U.N. Security
Council resolution condemning
the gas attack
in Syria.
The chill in Moscow today was a
far cry from
the atmosphere a year ago.
Then-candidate Donald Trump
repeatedly praised
Vladimir Putin during the
campaign, and he
suggested a rapprochement with
Russia was
both desirable and possible.
That all changed with last
week's gas attack
and President Trump's quick
response.
Even before the meetings,
President Putin
gave his own pointed assessment
of U.S.-Russia
relations today on Russian state
television.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through
translator): It is possible to
say that the
level of trust on a working
level, especially
on the military level, it has
not improved,
but rather has deteriorated.
MARGARET WARNER: In turn,
President Trump
had harsh new words for the
Russians and their
Syrian ally Assad in an
interview that aired
on FOX Business Network.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
If Russia didn't go in and back
this animal,
you wouldn't have a problem
right now.
Frankly, Putin is backing a
person that's
truly an evil person.
And I think it's very bad for
Russia.
I think it's very bad for
mankind.
It's very bad for this world.
MARGARET WARNER: Mr. Trump
followed up at
a joint White House news
conference with NATO's
secretary-general.
DONALD TRUMP: Right now, we're
not getting
along with Russia at all.
We may be an all-time low in
terms of relationship
with Russia.
This has built for a long period
of time,
but we are going to see what
happens.
MARGARET WARNER: Tensions are
over more than
Syria.
In Moscow, Secretary Tillerson
again criticized
Russia's intervention in
Ukraine, which triggered
Western sanctions.
REX TILLERSON: Until full
progress is made
under the Minsk accords, the
situation in
Ukraine will remain an obstacle
to improvement
in relations between the U.S.
and Russia.
MARGARET WARNER: Lavrov gave no
ground on
Ukraine or charges of Russian
meddling in
the U.S. election.
The two men did agree to
establish a working
group to try to stabilize
relations.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: China's
leader, Xi Jinping, told
President Trump that
he's willing to work with the
U.S. to stop
North Korea's nuclear program
peacefully.
The two men spoke in a
late-night phone call,
after Mr. Trump's Twitter
warning yesterday
that the U.S. might act alone.
In Beijing today, the Chinese
Foreign Ministry
said the call was a positive
sign.
LU KANG, Chinese Foreign
Ministry Spokesman
(through translator): On the
nuclear issue,
President Xi stated China's
stance that we
abide by the objective of
de-nuclearization
on the peninsula, continue to
maintain the
peace and stability on the
peninsula and continue
to resolve the issue peacefully
via dialogue
and negotiation.
The U.S. clearly understands
this stance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The phone call
came just days
after the two leaders met in
Florida, and
after the president seemed to
tie trade issues
to cooperation on North Korea.
In fact, the president said he
will not officially
label China a currency
manipulator.
He said that today, as he had
promised during
the campaign.
Mr. Trump tweeted today that the
call with
President Xi was a very good
conversation.
And in an interview that aired
today on FOX
Business News, he also said the
North Korea
situation is -- quote -- "not as
simple as
people would think."
There's word that the FBI
obtained a secret
court order last summer to
monitor communications
of Carter Page.
He was advising the Trump
campaign at the
time.
The Washington Post reports that
a special
court on intelligence matters
found there
was reason to believe Page was
acting as a
Russian agent.
Today on CNN, Page said -- quote
-- "It's
just such a joke that it's
beyond words."
Meanwhile, President Trump's
former campaign
chair, Paul Manafort, now says
he is registering
with the U.S. as a foreign
agent.
The Associated Press confirmed
today that
his lobbying firm did receive
more than $1
million from a pro-Russian
political party
in Ukraine.
That was in 2007 and 2009.
Manafort previously said that
any records
of such payments were
fabricated.
In South Africa, tens of
thousands turned
out against President Jacob Zuma
today on
his 75th birthday.
It was the latest in a string of
protests
calling for his resignation over
allegations
of widespread corruption.
Demonstrators flooded the main
square today
in the capital, Pretoria,
chanting and carrying
a mock coffin.
Meanwhile, Zuma attended a
birthday celebration
outside Johannesburg.
Back in this country,
Republicans managed
onto hold a U.S. House seat in
Kansas in Tuesday's
special congressional election.
Ron Estes won by just seven
points in a district
that went Republican in November
by 31 points.
Democrat James Thompson conceded
defeat last
night, but he said it's a
warning to Republicans
everywhere.
JAMES THOMPSON (D), Kansas
Congressional Candidate:
We have shown that this district
is not just
competitive, but that we can win
it.
We have already shocked this
country.
We have sent a message that no
Republican
district in this country is
safe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Kansas seat
had been held
by Mike Pompeo.
He's now President Trump
director of the CIA.
Republicans face three more
special elections
to hold onto seats in Georgia,
Montana and
South Carolina.
Their occupants also joined the
Trump administration.
The White House lifted a hiring
freeze on
the federal work force today.
President Trump had imposed it
on his first
day in office.
Now the administration is asking
agencies
to identify cuts that they can
make in their
staffs.
In economic news, the president
told The Wall
Street Journal that he is
concerned that the
U.S. dollar is getting too
strong and he said
he had not decided whether to
reappoint Janet
Yellen as chairman of the
Federal Reserve
when her term ends in 2018.
On Wall Street, the Dow Jones
industrial average
lost 59 points to close at
20591.
The Nasdaq fell 30, and the S&P
500 slipped
eight.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
I speak to
the head of NATO about how the
alliance should
address today's global threats;
Florida battles
wildfires raging across the
state; make NASA
great again?
-- the agency's future under
President Trump;
and much more.
As we reported earlier,
President Trump hosted
the NATO secretary-general this
afternoon
at the White House.
And a short time later, I spoke
with Jens
Stoltenberg.
Mr. Secretary-General, welcome
to the "NewsHour."
We heard President Trump say
today that relations
between the United States and
Russia may be
at their lowest point since the
end of the
Cold War.
Would you say the same thing
about relations
between NATO and Russia right
now?
JENS STOLTENBERG, NATO
Secretary-General:
At least the relationship is
difficult.
And that reflects that we see a
more assertive
Russia, which has implemented a
very significant
military buildup over several
years, and a
Russia which has used military
force against
neighbors, especially Ukraine.
And NATO is responding to that
with the high
readiness of our forces, with
the biggest
reinforcement to our collective
defense since
the end of the Cold War.
At the same time, we say that we
are seeking
to avoid a new Cold War, avoid a
new arms
race, and, therefore, we
continue to work
for a more constructive
relationship with
Russia, including political
dialogue with
Russia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, how do you
prevent it
from becoming just a
oneupmanship?
Because you're right.
The Russians have sent more
troops, move material
to their border.
NATO is now doing the same thing
on its eastern
border.
How does this thing just -- how
do you keep
it from spiraling out of
control?
JENS STOLTENBERG: Partly by
making sure that
what NATO does is proportionate,
defensive.
And, therefore, we are deploying
battle groups,
battalions, which we consider
necessary to
convey a message of deterrence,
credible deterrence,
that if one NATO ally is
attacked, it will
trigger a whole response from
the whole alliance.
But, at the same time, we have
been able to
convene last three meetings of
-- in what
we call the NATO-Russia council
after two
years without any meetings.
And this council is a platform
where NATO
and Russia meets.
We discuss issues like Ukraine,
like Afghanistan,
and so on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
JENS STOLTENBERG: And that's a
way to keep
the channels for political
dialogue open and
to keep the tensions down.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You did just from
the meeting
with President Trump.
He spent months and months in
his campaign
for president and even since
then criticizing
NATO, criticizing its role, at
times even
asking whether NATO was
obsolete.
Why do you think his -- or do
you think his
view of NATO has changed, and,
if so, why?
JENS STOLTENBERG: I welcome the
fact that
he has clearly stated today that
NATO is not
obsolete.
And I think, also, that reflects
that NATO
is adapting.
NATO is the most successful
alliance in history
because we have been able to
change, to adapt
when the world is changing.
And now NATO is stepping up its
effort in
the global fight against
terrorism, and we
are responding to a more
assertive Russia
with an increase of our
collective defense,
with more presence in the
eastern part of
the alliance.
So, as long as NATO changes when
the world
is changing, we will be very
important for
the security of all our allies,
including
the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you did
note today that
NATO members are increasing
their contributions
to the alliance, as President
Trump has been
calling for them to do.
Are you confident, though, that
that is going
to continue in the way that you
and President
Trump say that it needs to?
JENS STOLTENBERG: I expect it to
continue,
because all 28 allies have
agreed that they
will stop the cuts in defense
spending, gradual
increase, and then move towards
spending 2
percent of GDP, gross domestic
product, on
defense.
And the encouraging thing is
that we have
seen that we have turned a
corner.
After many, many years of
decline in defense
spending across Europe and
Canada, in 2016,
we saw the first significant
increase.
We still have a long way to go,
but at least
European allies have kind of
started move
in the right direction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You also spoke
today, Mr. Secretary-General,
about the fight against
terrorism, the global
fight, and you said NATO has a
larger role
to play in that regard.
What exactly did you have in
mind?
JENS STOLTENBERG: Many things,
but perhaps
the most important thing is to
build local
capacity, meaning train local
forces, build
the local defense institutions,
defense ministries,
command and control, because, in
the long
run, it is expected that local
forces are
stabilizing their own country,
fighting terrorism
themselves, instead of NATO
deploying a large
number of combat troops in
combat operations.
And that's NATO's experience
from Afghanistan.
We have ended our combat
operations there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
JENS STOLTENBERG: We train the
local Afghans
to fight terrorism themselves
and think, in
the long run, that's a much more
sustainable
approach.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But that is -- I
think most
observers now see Afghanistan as
slipping
back into chaos.
The Taliban is stronger than
many people say
that it's been in years.
ISIS now has a foothold.
But you're saying that that's
not a reason
for NATO to get involved?
JENS STOLTENBERG: I'm saying
that there are
many difficult challenges in
Afghanistan.
And we still have Taliban.
We still have terrorist
organizations there,
and we will see violence and we
will see conflict
there also in the coming years,.
But we have achieved at least
two important
things.
Afghanistan is no longer a safe
haven for
international terrorists.
We have a strong Afghan army,
which is fighting
the terrorists and Taliban.
And the second thing is that
they are able
to do that without us being
there to conduct
the combat operations.
What NATO troops are doing in
Afghanistan
is to train, assist and advise
Afghans, but
they are actually doing the
fighting.
They are actually taking the
responsibility
for the security in their own
country.
And that is a great achievement,
compared
to what we saw just a few years
ago, when
NATO troops had to conduct the
combat operations
fighting the Taliban.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you think
that war going
in the right direction, though?
JENS STOLTENBERG: I think it is
a very important
step in the right direction that
the Afghans
have taken over responsibility
for the security
in their own country, and NATO
being able
to end its combat presence in
Afghanistan.
But,of course, there are still
many, many
uncertainties, challenges and
difficulties
in Afghanistan.
But we have to enable the
Afghans to manage
those challenges themselves.
We cannot solve all the problems
for the Afghans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, Mr.
Secretary-General,
a question about Turkey, which,
as you know,
is just days away from a
referendum that would
grant sweeping additional powers
to President
Erdogan, essentially making him
-- or allowing
him to be immune from any
oversight by the
parliament or by the courts.
You know, there are those who
are critics
of his who are saying that this
is going to
lead to if it passes is NATO's
second largest
standing army controlled, in
essence, by someone
who has dictatorial powers.
How comfortable would you be
with that?
JENS STOLTENBERG: Turkey's a
valued ally,
important ally for NATO, not the
least because
of its strategic geographic
location, bordering
Syria and Iraq and close to
Russia and the
Black Sea.
And we have to remember Turkey
has suffered
many terrorist attacks, a failed
coup attempt
in July of last year, and is the
ally most
affected by the instability, the
violence
we see in Syria and Iraq.
Turkey has, of course, the right
to protect
itself against terrorism,
against attacks,
but I expect it to be done in a
way which
is in accordance with the rule
of law, democratic
values.
And that is something I have
expressed several
times in meetings with the
Turkish leaders.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jens Stoltenberg,
who is the
secretary-general for NATO, we
thank you very
much.
JENS STOLTENBERG: Thank you so
JUDY WOODRUFF: More than 100
wildfires are
burning in and around Florida,
and the state
is expecting a difficult fire
season ahead.
Yesterday, the governor declared
a state of
emergency there.
William Brangham has the latest.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Over 70,000
acres have burned
across the state since February.
And the fires are not just in
one spot.
They're located in all corners
of the state.
This is also occurring while
Florida is dealing
with a major drought.
Jim Karels is the director of
the Florida
Forest Service and a 32-year
veteran of fighting
fires.
He joins us from Tallahassee.
Welcome to the "NewsHour."
Jim, I wonder if you could just
give us a
sense of how things are in
Florida right now.
JIM KARELS, Director, Florida
Forest Service:
Dry.
The peninsula of Florida is --
especially
South and Central Florida,
extremely dry right
now.
And it's drying out as you go
north all the
way to the Georgia-Florida line.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: We mentioned
you're also
dealing with a drought at the
same time.
How much is that a contributing
factor to
all of this?
JIM KARELS: A big contributing
factor, in
that, you know, we had some late
freezes,
didn't have much of a winter
here in Florida,
but we did have a freeze late
into February,
early March.
And it went down to
South-Central Florida,
and then it really didn't rain
after that.
So you have got that dry
vegetation.
You have got -- low rainfalls
were really
since about January, kind of a
La Nina effect
that we tend to get every few
years in Florida.
And now we're into our normally
dry season,
April, May, parts of Florida,
early June,
where we're normally dry anyway.
And that increases the whole
situation, where
it makes it very easy for fires
to start,
makes it very easy for fires to
spread.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This is still
the beginning
of your fire season.
Do you have any sense of what
the longer-term
forecast is?
What does it look like coming
down the road?
JIM KARELS: Well, we have got a
couple forecasts
out of -- one, our National Fire
Center in
Boise.
And that pretty much paints a
red target on
Florida probably through April,
May, and June.
The NOAA forecasts show the
drought expanding
into some parts of the state
into the same
period, into April, May, June.
That's normally our dry period.
Along with how dry we already
are, it really
paints a picture that we have
got a pretty
intense fire season in front of
us.
We are very busy already.
We're busy early.
And we're drier than normal
early, as it is
in early April right now.
And we really expect to probably
have to fight
fire all the way to June, maybe
even July.
And it tends to move up the
state.
Our worst right now is South
Florida.
It moves to Central Florida, and
then it moves
to North Florida as it kind of
closes out
our fire seasons.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And over 100
fires.
Can you give us a sense of what
is causing
so many different simultaneous
fires?
JIM KARELS: Well, right now, the
majority
of our fires are human-caused,
probably 90
percent of them.
Various different things.
Some of it is yard trash
burning, where people
are cleaning, spring cleaning,
and they're
burning their leaves.
Some of it is vehicles,
catalytic convertors,
that type, or equipment working
in the woods
or the wildlands.
Some of it is arson, incendiary.
Have some issues with that.
And then this past weekend, we
got some lightning,
so we're starting to see the
lightning fires
evolve as well.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Most Americans
think of
fires out West in the very dry
brush and forestland
we see out there, but I
understand that the
type of vegetation that is
burning and the
way it burns in Florida is quite
different.
JIM KARELS: It is.
Fire evolved under fire, so it
was constant
fire prior to humans.
And the vegetation tends to be
more waxy,
more resinous.
What we say is, in Florida,
green burns.
That's different from the West.
The West, the fuels tend to be
very cured,
very dry, very -- essentially
dead, where,
down here, you come in here and
you look at
our vegetation, you think that's
not going
to burn, and it's just the
opposite.
And then it burns under a lot
higher humidity.
Our fires can burn very
intensely all the
way up to 40, 50 percent
humidity.
In the West, it tends to be 20
percent or
below.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: With all these
different
fires across the state, what is
the danger
to the human population?
JIM KARELS: As you know,
Florida's got a big
population, about 20 million
people.
So, just about every fire we
have impacts
what we call the urban
interface, or homes,
structures.
And so far this year, we have
evacuated over
1,800 homes.
And we lost 27.
So, we saved a lot, impacted a
good number
of people in their daily lives
from the wildfires.
And the other thing in Florida
that it really
experiences is the impact on the
roadways.
We get smoke on the highways.
With all those people and with a
lot of tourists
moving through the state, the
roads become
dangerous when the visibility
gets down low.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right, Jim
Karels of
the Florida Forest Service,
thank you very
much.
And good luck down there.
JIM KARELS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
new investigation
finds nearly 2,000 allegations
of sexual abuse
by U.N. peacekeepers; what's
left in an ancient
Assyrian city after years of
ISIS rule; and
"The Refugees," fictional
stories of immigration,
identity and love.
But first: How will NASA's
mission change
under President Trump and a
Republican Congress
that helps decide where money
should go?
Some big changes could be in
store for space
exploration and the missions set
into place
now that could stretch well
beyond the Trump
era.
Miles O'Brien has the story for
our weekly
segment about the Leading Edge
of science
and technology.
MILES O'BRIEN: The balcony at
Congressman
John Culberson's office on
Capitol Hill offers
a sweeping panorama of
Washington, but the
Republican from Houston is
usually looking
higher.
REP.
JOHN CULBERSON (R), Texas:
There's Mercury.
Mars is going to appear right
here.
We go this way, there's Orion.
Sirius is going to appear right
here.
MILES O'BRIEN: Culberson has
more than a hobby-level
interest in space.
He chairs the House
Appropriations Subcommittee
that oversees NASA.
In his ninth term, he is riding
high, as the
Trump administration embraces
his strategy
for exploring space.
REP.
JOHN CULBERSON: NASA has been
underfunded
for far too long.
They have been short-sticked by
previous administrations,
this past administration.
And I'm very excited and pleased
to see President
Trump recommend enough funding
for NASA as
a whole.
MILES O'BRIEN: President Trump
apparently
sees NASA as a priority.
He's made passing references to
space in his
inaugural address.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
We stand at the birth of a new
millennium,
ready to unlock the mysteries of
space.
MILES O'BRIEN: And in his speech
to Congress.
DONALD TRUMP: American
footprints on distant
worlds are not too big a dream.
MILES O'BRIEN: The Trump
administration is
proposing only a 1 percent
reduction in NASA's
$19 billion annual budget.
Hardest-hit programs are science
and education.
But at a time when the federal
scientific
enterprise is facing deep,
unprecedented cuts,
the space agency may have dodged
a missile.
Mr. Trump's space advisers
include former
House Speaker Newt Gingrich and
former Congressman
Bob Walker, who served as
chairman of the
subcommittee that oversees NASA.
ROBERT WALKER (R), Former U.S.
Congressman:
Newt has had several
conversations with Trump
and with Vice President Pence.
And both of them are space
cadets.
And there are other fairly
high-ranking people
in the White House who are also
space cadets.
MILES O'BRIEN: In this case,
space cadet is
a compliment.
Walker says the White House
would like NASA
to get out of low Earth orbit,
leaving that
realm to private enterprise.
Beyond that, the space agency
takes a role
that increases with the distance
from Earth.
The administration is also
focused on humans
returning to the moon.
ROBERT WALKER: I think the moon
is an important
step on the way to Mars.
I think you have to have some
experience in
a very hostile environment where
you develop
some of the technologies that
you need to
exist on Mars before you
actually head to
Mars.
MILES O'BRIEN: For Congressman
Culberson,
that is well and good, but he
believes the
most important green-lit mission
is aimed
at this object, the icy moon of
Jupiter, Europa.
The Europa Clipper was approved
by the Obama
administration and Congress in
2015, more
than 10 years after Culberson
began obsessively
pushing NASA to go there.
Europa has always fascinated
him.
Beneath the ice is a salty
ocean.
How much?
He answers the question with a
poster on foam
core he keeps in his office.
REP.
JOHN CULBERSON: This is all the
water on Earth,
both fresh and salt, and all the
water on
Europa.
This is a free-floating ice
shell, and there's
two to three times more water on
Europa than
there is on Earth.
MILES O'BRIEN: Scientists find
this tantalizing,
because, no matter how far down
they explore
in our oceans, they find all
kinds of living
creatures.
KEVIN PETER HAND, NASA: And with
that much
water out there today in our
solar system,
that begs the question, could
there be life
within that ocean?
MILES O'BRIEN: Jet propulsion
laboratory astrobiologist
Kevin Hand is in line to be the
project scientist
for a NASA mission to land on
Europa by about
2030.
That lander would be preceded by
an orbiter
slated for launch in 2022.
The orbiter is designed to
capture stunning
imagery and detailed science
about the salts
and any organic compounds on the
surface,
and use radar to look beneath at
the boundary
between the ice and the ocean.
All of this will help them
determine where
to land.
KEVIN PETER HAND: We'd love to
melt through
the ice and reach the ocean
directly, but,
based on the evidence we have,
Europa's ice
shell does serve as a relatively
good window
into the ocean below.
We could, perhaps by sampling
the surface,
also be sampling ocean material,
and thereby
also be potentially grabbing a
sample that
could have some little Europa
organisms.
MILES O'BRIEN: But, for many
years, NASA didn't
seem interested in Europan
krill.
The NASA administrator under
George W. Bush,
Mike Griffin, thwarted
Culberson's first attempt
to land on Europa.
It was a mission called the
Jupiter Icy Moons
Orbiter.
And it was canceled in 2006 to
pay for completion
of the International Space
Station.
REP.
JOHN CULBERSON: When Mike
Griffin canceled
the Europa mission last decade,
it scarred
me so badly, I swore I wouldn't
let the bureaucrats
cancel this mission again.
So, today, the Europa orbiter
and lander is
the only mission it is still
illegal for NASA
not to fly.
MILES O'BRIEN: You heard right.
Culberson made the Europa
orbiter and lander
missions the law of the land in
2015.
But exploring Europa is
challenging and expensive.
NASA managers complained their
plate was already
too full with the space station
and an extensive
campaign to explore Mars.
And the focus on Mars is
sustained by the
goal of eventually sending
humans to the surface.
Europa is only a destination for
robots, and
hearty ones at that.
Lethal radiation levels ensure
no human can
ever visit.
It makes the mission less
attractive to the
powerful astronaut side of the
House at NASA.
But in this war of the worlds,
Mars has met
its match.
ROBERT WALKER: The fact that
people are talking
about Europa right now is a
result of Chairman
Culberson's interest in it.
And the fact is that he has
caused NASA to
say, if that's what Chairman
Culberson wants,
that's what Chairman Culberson
gets.
(LAUGHTER)
MILES O'BRIEN: Culberson isn't
stopping there.
He has written a 50-year plan
for NASA that
includes a spacecraft that can
go 10 percent
the speed of light for
humanity's first interstellar
mission to the nearest
Earth-like star.
The launch date is 2069, 100
years after the
first moon landing.
REP.
JOHN CULBERSON: I have always
wanted to restore
NASA to the glory days of
Apollo, as you and
I remember as kids.
I want to see NASA go above and
beyond the
glory days of Apollo.
MILES O'BRIEN: Culberson is all
about making
NASA great again.
But watch what happened in the
Oval Office
after the president signed the
authorization
bill for space agency's current
budget.
REP.
JOHN CULBERSON: Mr. President,
if I may, just
as Americans remember that
President Eisenhower
was the father of the interstate
highway system,
with your bill signing today and
your vision
and leadership, future
generations will remember
that President Donald Trump was
the father
of the interplanetary highway
system.
DONALD TRUMP: Well, that sounds
exciting.
(LAUGHTER)
DONALD TRUMP: First, we want to
fix our highways.
We're going to fix our highways.
(APPLAUSE)
MILES O'BRIEN: Europa and Mars
may beckon,
but, for politicians, it's never
wise to ignore
the potholes, even when
surrounded by people
who care more about black holes.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Miles O'Brien
in Washington.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The peacekeeping
force deployed
by the United Nations has come
under increasing
scrutiny in recent years.
That is due in no small part to
past allegations
of sexual abuse by troops
deployed in countries
like the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
and the Central African
Republic.
A new investigation by the
Associated Press
finds the problem of sexual
abuse and exploitation
by peacekeepers is wider and
even more disturbing
than previously known.
Hari Sreenivasan has the story
from our New
York studios.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The AP found
nearly 2,000
allegations of abuse and
exploitation in the
past 12 years.
More than 300 of those cases
involved children.
And since the U.N. cannot punish
peacekeepers
from other countries, only a
fraction of the
alleged perpetrators served jail
time.
The AP also spoke with officials
in 23 countries
who had troops serving as
peacekeepers and
were accused of these
violations.
Trish Wilson is the
international investigators
editor who oversaw the AP story.
Ms. Wilson, thanks for joining
us.
How did you come upon the
investigations that
were under way by the U.N.?
TRISH WILSON, Associated Press:
Well, earlier
last year, there was a lot of
reporting out
of the Congo and the Central
African Republic
about another wave of
allegations against
U.N. peacekeepers, so we decided
to take a
look at the numbers going back
to 2004, when
the first wave of allegations
came out against
peacekeepers.
And that's what got us started.
From there, we just kind of --
we just counted
the number of allegations per
year that the
U.N. had reported.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, you have
zoomed in
on Haiti and started to look at
almost a pattern
of behavior here.
What happened there?
TRISH WILSON: Haiti has been
singled out as
being a country where a lot of
these abuses
have occurred in an unusually
high number,
given the total of 2,000.
So we just went to look and see
what we could
find out in Haiti.
We compiled the numbers.
We found 150 cases.
We found a lot of cases
involving children.
And, as we were doing the
reporting -- we
have a team in Haiti and we sent
our investigative
reporter Paisley Dodds to Haiti.
And, eventually, we stumbled
across this internal
report, investigative report
from the U.N.
which chronicled this amazing
tale of children
that were in a sex ring that was
abused -- and
were abused by U.N. peacekeepers
over a three-year
period.
It was nine children abused by
134 U.N. peacekeepers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, these
children were
paid sometimes, what, a few
pennies or a dollar
at a time for sex acts?
TRISH WILSON: Yes.
It was low as -- there was food,
yogurt, juice
given to the children, who were
hungry, and
that's why they did this.
We saw -- the lowest amount we
found was 75
cents, and the highest amount
was $20.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the one
hand, the U.N.
conducts what you call a
thorough investigation,
but then what happens after
that?
TRISH WILSON: You know, that's
what's curious.
It was really a very good
investigation by
the U.N.
They looked -- they went to the
children.
They made sure that the children
were not
making it up.
The children actually spoke
Sinhalese, which
is -- which was very telling.
They showed pictures of 1,000
peacekeepers
to the children.
And the children identified
various locations
where they had sex with these --
or were forced
to have sex, or lured into
having sex by these
peacekeepers.
So it was really quite a good
investigation.
What happened after that
investigation is
what typically happens at the
U.N. and is
one of the reasons why this is
such an important
study, or case study.
It's -- the problem is that the
U.N. is in
a legal bind.
As you said when you opened the
segment, it
doesn't have jurisdiction over
any of these
countries.
So the deal is, here's our
investigative report.
Now it's time for Sri Lanka to
come in and
take a look at this report.
And, in this case, Sri Lanka
did; 114 of those
soldiers were sent home.
But what happened after that is
anybody's
guess.
There is no accountability.
There are no names of any of
these people,
and nobody ever went to jail.
So, if you can imagine, these
kinds of corroborated
crimes against children over a
three-year
period, corroborated by a U.N.
investigative
team, and then nothing happens.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And you point
out that there
was -- you said that some of
these students
-- or some of these children
were speaking
Sinhalese, which is one of the
languages spoken
in Sri Lanka.
And how would they have known it
if they had
not been in touch with these
peacekeepers?
There were other countries as
well involved.
And it's happening in other
parts of the world.
Yes.
TRISH WILSON: Yes, there have
been allegations
all over the world.
I mean, this particular story
focused on Haiti.
But we are looking at -- we are
doing a series.
This is the first in a series
that looks at
what's been going on with U.N.
peacekeepers.
So there have been, sure,
problems in Central
Africa Republic, problems in
Congo with U.N.
peacekeepers, as well as other
places.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What's been
the reaction
from the United Nations to this?
TRISH WILSON: Well, they say
that they are
very concerned.
They do not think that this is
acceptable.
They seem to want -- they have
announced yet
another wave of reforms.
But these reforms are very
similar to what
they announced in 2004, when the
first wave
of allegations became public.
So, the question is, well, how
do you fix
this?
Is this OK?
Can we really pay for
peacekeepers to go abroad
to protect people, and, instead,
have this
appalling abuse against the very
civilians
they're sent to protect?
No.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Trish Wilson
from the Associated
Press, thanks so much for
joining us.
TRISH WILSON: Thank you for
having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The ISIS campaign
of terror,
murder and conquest has been
well-documented,
but the group has also used its
particular
interpretation of Islam to
justify the destruction
of historical treasures in what
is known as
the Fertile Crescent, the area
in Mesopotamia
between the Tigris and Euphrates
rivers, where
the earliest recorded
civilizations began.
From the ancient ruins of Nimrud
in Northern
Iraq, special correspondent
Marcia Biggs reports.
It's part of our ongoing
coverage of Culture
at Risk.
MARCIA BIGGS: The road to the
cradle of civilization
is finally accessible.
We're making our way there to
see what's left
of a 3,000-year-old city after
only 2.5 years
under ISIS.
With us, two archaeologists,
Leila Salih,
originally from nearby Mosul,
and Tobin Hartnell,
an Australian teaching at a
local Kurdish
university.
It takes us four hours to travel
the roughly
35 miles, through checkpoint
after checkpoint
controlled by Kurdish Peshmerga
and Iraqi
Shia militias.
Sheik Khalid Al-Sabah
Al-Jabbouri commands
the Shia militia controlling the
area.
He grew up in this village, and
treasures
memories of picnics at Nimrud
and the buses
full of tourists.
KHALID AL-JABBOURI, Militia
Commander (through
translator): For us in this
village, Nimrud
is one of the first things we
saw when we
were born.
This ancient city and its
antiques it's a
part of our life.
MARCIA BIGGS: Nimrud is the
ancient city known
as Calah in the Bible, capital
of the Assyrian
empire, known for its famous
lamassu, winged
bulls guarding the gates of the
palace.
It was destroyed in the seventh
century B.C.
Its ruins buried in time,
archaeologists unearthed
it 2,500 years later.
When the Islamic State captured
parts of Northern
Iraq in 2014, it declared war on
the ruins
of Nimrud, releasing this video
of ISIS militants
taking sledgehammers to the
ancient site,
drilling holes in its carvings,
and finally
blowing the entire place up.
When ISIS took the town, they
also destroyed
Sheik Khalid's home and killed
40 of his family
members, including two brothers.
But he says he rarely cried,
until he saw
this ISIS video.
KHALID AL-JABBOURI (through
translator): I
lost something priceless.
My sorrow lies in the fact that
we lost something
that we were so proud of when
tourists came
to our country.
The pride we felt for them and
our civilization,
what our forefathers made for
our country,
it's a subject that's part of
our soul.
When the Saddam regime fell in
2003, we and
our clans protected those
monuments because
there was no central Iraqi
government.
We were able to protect the
palace from looting.
But ISIS, ISIS did something we
were not expecting.
MARCIA BIGGS: The area was taken
back by Iraqi
forces last November, but it was
forever changed.
When we arrived, the first thing
we noticed
was that the pyramid-like
structure, the famous
ziggurat of the Ishtar Temple,
was erased
from its skyline, and the temple
once at its
feet the victim of a massive
explosion.
TOBIN HARTNELL, Archaeologist:
Every photograph,
every view I have ever seen of
Nimrud has
that temple, that ziggurat.
And it's gone.
That's the thing that is the
most devastating,
is to see it just bulldozed,
just -- it's
gone.
The iconic image of Nimrud is
with the ziggurat.
MARCIA BIGGS: For Tobin
Hartnell, this was
an experience he'd waited for.
He studied Assyria and its
ancient capital
for 15 years, yet he had never
seen it.
He took a job teaching at the
American University
of Iraq in 2014 and was just
about to move
his family when ISIS swept
through the region.
TOBIN HARTNELL: We got basically
the e-mail
or a call, in my case, an
e-mail, saying,
well, you don't have to accept
the job because
ISIS has just taken Mosul.
My wife and I, we talked about
it, we're going,
because, as archaeologists, this
is where
the work needs to be.
MARCIA BIGGS: And how does it
feel to be walking
down these steps for the first
time?
TOBIN HARTNELL: I mean, it's
bittersweet.
This is an incredible site that
I have been
looking forward to going to for
over 20 years.
And look at it.
I mean, walking over rubble, the
destruction
that ISIS has left has turned
one of the most
magnificent palaces of Assyria
into a disaster
zone.
MARCIA BIGGS: The gates of the
famous Northwest
Palace, once the home of
magnificent winged
bulls, reduced to rubble, its
walls bare.
TOBIN HARTNELL: I never got to
see the gate
as it should be seen, that these
bulls welcomed
you to the palace.
LEILA SALIH, Archaeologist:
Every Assyrian
gates have a couple of winged
bulls, so we
cannot imagine the gates without
them.
MARCIA BIGGS: It wasn't Leila
Salih's first
time here.
She was 14 years old when she
first visited
Nimrud.
LEILA SALIH: To be honest with
you, at that
time, we didn't care about
historical things
or ancient civilization things.
We just would like to escape out
of school.
But what I can remember, the
huge figure of
lamassu and the facade of that
palace.
MARCIA BIGGS: But this was a
happy place for
you to come with friends and
family?
LEILA SALIH: Of course.
It's a very happy and wonderful,
amazing place
for us.
MARCIA BIGGS: Salih is from
nearby Mosul,
much of it still controlled by
ISIS.
She fled in 2014 with only a
handbag.
She was the curator for the
Mosul Museum,
which ISIS was seen destroying
in these videos.
Yet, even with the widespread
damage, both
she and Hartnell say there is
still hope for
Nimrud.
LEILA SALIH: I thought we lost
everything,
as you see in the video.
But after I visited Nimrud, yes,
there are
some positive signs for us.
TOBIN HARTNELL: You can see the
wings of the
bull here.
MARCIA BIGGS: One source of
hope, large chunks
of the rubble still exist, which
makes restoration
easier.
And several of the original
lamassu bulls
excavated in the 19th century
have been living
for decades in museums in London
and New York.
While the displaying of Iraq's
antiquities
abroad may have been
controversial, for the
man whose childhood was spent
among the ruins,
this actually provides some
comfort.
KHALID AL-JABBOURI (through
translator): Maybe
we Iraqis felt hurt when we saw
our monuments
displayed outside of Iraq.
We get hurt because it's our
civilization.
But when ISIS occupied the city,
I felt relieved
that Nimrud monuments had been
transported
outside of Iraq and remain
protected.
And we are proud of them
wherever they are.
MARCIA BIGGS: And after over 100
years of
excavation, Hartnell says less
than a quarter
of the ancient city was actually
unearthed.
TOBIN HARTNELL: There's still
1,000, 2,000
years of history underneath that
palace.
The whole city is waiting to be
discovered.
MARCIA BIGGS: So, in some ways,
this being
razed will allow archaeologists
to see what's
underneath?
TOBIN HARTNELL: If, when we're
doing our cleanup
and restoration, we take some
more time to
dig down, we will find many more
discoveries
from what happened before the
empire, what
happened in the 10th, 11th, 12th
centuries,
which are also great periods in
Mesopotamian
history.
And yet we know almost nothing.
MARCIA BIGGS: For Hartnell,
amidst the sobering
reality of finally checking
Nimrud off his
bucket list, comfort in
determining what needs
be done.
TOBIN HARTNELL: You have to see,
be there,
see the destruction to start to
formulate
a plan.
Archaeologists need to be on the
ground.
So, I won't say a dream comes
true, but it
was on my dream list before it
was destroyed,
and for very good reason.
This is a fantastic place, and I
think it
will be again.
MARCIA BIGGS: As the sun sets on
Nimrud, it's
a promise that a new day will
come.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Marcia Biggs in
Nimrud, Northern Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now the latest
addition to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
It's "The Refugees," a short
story collection
from last year's winner of the
Pulitzer Prize
for Fiction.
Jeffrey Brown talked with Viet
Thanh Nguyen
at this year's Conference of the
Association
of American Writers and writing
programs here
in Washington, D.C.
JEFFREY BROWN: I wanted to start
with -- maybe
it's a basic question, but it's
the word refugees,
because it's an important one to
you.
VIET THANH NGUYEN, Author, "The
Refugees":
Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: What does it
mean?
VIET THANH NGUYEN: To be a
refugee, especially
in our contemporary moment, is
to be different
than an immigrant.
I think immigrants are somewhat
acceptable
to Europe and the United States,
but refugees
are the unwanted from wherever
they come from.
And they're often unwanted where
they come
to, and especially in the United
States.
I think Americans think it's
un-American to
be a refugee.
So, it's actually really
important for me
to continually assert, I am a
refugee, I write
about refugees, and that we need
to think
about the necessity of opening
our doors and
welcoming refugees in.
JEFFREY BROWN: Living between
worlds, never
leaving one behind fully, why is
that so much
harder for the refugee than
other -- than
the immigrant or others?
VIET THANH NGUYEN: I think
immigrants do feel
some of that attachment to
wherever they came
from, but they usually made a
choice to go
somewhere, and they have decided
to look forward
to some extent.
But refugees are often compelled
to leave
by violent circumstance.
They're really still attached to
wherever
they came from.
So, that's where I think
refugees oftentimes
have a hard time adjusting, at
least psychologically.
They may adjust culturally and
economically,
but, psychologically, half of
them is still
somewhere else.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, in the first
story in this
new collection, "Black-Eyed
Women," the main
character is a woman who's a
Vietnamese American
ghostwriter, right?
So she's actually there, but not
there, literally.
VIET THANH NGUYEN: Right.
And so I wanted to make it sort
of a story
that was about ghosts in many
different ways.
She's a ghostwriter, but she's
actually haunted
by a real ghost.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
VIET THANH NGUYEN: And that
ghost is of her
dead brother, who she thought
had died on
the escape from Vietnam on a
boat.
And then, one night, he comes
knocking on
the door.
He's literally a ghost who swam
thousands
of miles to get to her door.
And it's about the figurative
and the literal
hauntings that so many people
who have escaped
through traumatic circumstances
continue to
live with.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
But the emphasis is on the real
ghost, right?
VIET THANH NGUYEN: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, real, as in
these people
are alive for your characters?
VIET THANH NGUYEN: Yes.
And I think, for many people --
many cultures,
ghosts really exist.
I mean, literally, Vietnamese
people, for
example, often recount being
visited by people
who have just died, not to haunt
them, but
to come and say goodbye.
JEFFREY BROWN: As I read through
the stories
in this book, you have got
characters who
have lived here in the U.S. for
a long time.
You have stories set in Vietnam.
You have Americans going back.
What are you exploring through
these stories?
VIET THANH NGUYEN: I think that,
when I say
Vietnamese to Americans or to
other people,
there might be this idea that
there's only
one Vietnamese kind of culture
or one Vietnamese
kind of people, and I'm going to
speak for
them.
But Vietnamese are just like
everybody else.
And they're diverse.
So this is a collection where I
wanted to
talk about the young and the
old, the straight
and the gay, the conservative
and the radicals,
the ones who stayed and ones who
went back,
to give people a sense of how
heterogeneous
and contradictory these people
are.
JEFFREY BROWN: Are you aware, as
the readers
are aware, of the newness of
this voice in
our literature?
I mean, do you feel that?
VIET THANH NGUYEN: I think so,
because, in
order to be a writer, you need
to read a lot
in the traditions in which you
write.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
VIET THANH NGUYEN: So, I have
read a lot of
Vietnamese writing,
Asian-American writing,
and American writing.
And the novel is explicitly
designed to provoke
all these different categories
and do things
that I don't think has been done
before in
those categories, including in
contemporary
American fiction.
JEFFREY BROWN: I want to ask you
about you
and your ghosts, because you
say, I was born
in Vietnam, but made in America.
To what extent do you feel
yourself of two
worlds?
VIET THANH NGUYEN: Well, when I
was growing
up, I felt myself to be a spy in
my parents'
household, because they were
Vietnamese, and
I was being Americanized.
And then, when I went outside, I
was a Vietnamese
spying on Americans.
And that sense of always being
an observer,
always being a spy has continued
to stay with
me.
And it's been influenced by this
refugee past,
the sense of being haunted by
what has impacted
my parents and my Vietnamese
community.
And it's been productive, in the
sense that
it has made me into a writer, to
always be
able to see things from the
inside and the
outside, to always be observing,
to always
be spying on people.
That's really enormously useful
for a writer.
But it means I have to allow
myself to not
forget that sense of haunting
and displacement.
JEFFREY BROWN: But that means
you don't want
to leave that behind, in other
words.
I mean, you have to live in this
world, but
you also have to hold onto
something.
VIET THANH NGUYEN: I think I
have to be willing
to be unsettled and to be
uncomfortable.
And most people don't want that.
Most people want to be in one
place.
They want to feel settled and
happy.
They want to feel comfortable.
That's not a good condition for
a writer,
usually.
So, it means I have to be
willing to tolerate
that, to cultivate that, in
order to get the
kinds of insights that I can,
and then make
other people uncomfortable with
those insights
as a result.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, when you --
if we fast-forward
to today's world, and this
discussion of refugees
and immigrants, do you feel a
responsibility
as a writer or as citizen to
address these
things even more?
VIET THANH NGUYEN: I do feel
that as an individual.
I'm a politically, like, aware
person, but
I also feel that, as a writer,
that I think
one of the writer's most urgent
tasks is to
say something about what is
happening in the
world today.
And I think that the sharpening
of the political
division has really made other
writers much
more cognizant of that also,
that we need
to address the urgent political
controversies
of our time.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, how are you
doing that?
VIET THANH NGUYEN: Well, I think
"The Refugees"
was my way of doing that.
And it just happened to be that
the refugee
problem, which has always been
with us, has
come to a head.
And now, outside of that, I take
the opportunity
outside of this platform as a
writer to write
op-eds, to speak out in public,
to go on the
Seth Meyers show, and not just
to talk about
happy things, but also to talk
about our history
and refugees and immigrants to a
late-night
audience.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
Do you get a sense that the
culture is listening?
VIET THANH NGUYEN: I think so.
Either they're listening because
they hate
refugees and immigrants, or
they're listening
because they think we should
embrace and welcome
refugees and immigrants.
But people are listening, one
way or the other.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, the
new story collection
is "The Refugees."
Viet Thanh Nguyen, thank you
very much.
VIET THANH NGUYEN: Thanks,
Jeffrey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we thank him
for talking
with us.
And tonight on PBS, "Nature"
presents a look
at conservation efforts in
Puerto Rico to
protect endangered wildlife from
extinction
on land and at sea.
And "American Experience" airs
its final night
of "The Great War."
That's tonight on most PBS
stations.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: Why do
so many Americans feel so
financially insecure?
Two economists followed more
than 200 low-
and moderate-income households
for a full
year to understand why.
And the results of their study
are part of
a book, "The Financial Diaries."
You can read an excerpt on our
Web site.
It's PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday: As Tax Day
approaches, our Making
Sense team zeros in on why,
compared with
many other countries, U.S.
taxpayers spend
more time preparing their tax
returns.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.